# Marshak's Table

This is from Marshak's work on covert processes.

Certain things are under, On And Above The Table in conversations.

- _Overt_: this is what goes on the table for discussion because people in the organization assess it to be legitimate or acceptable. This depends on the individuals and the organization.
- _Covert_: topics that can't be discussed openly are knocked off the table but do not go away. They continue to exist. The 5 places where covert processes manifest are:
  1. Things outside awareness in prisms (lenses that you view the world) e.g mindsets (socialist vs capitalist)
  2. emotions, politics and power,, values (what is right or wrong, shaped by our personal experience), psychodynamics
  3. Things that are unexpressed and above the clouds: inspirations, "this is too good to ever happen", tacit beliefs that it is inappropriate to express optimism. Unexpressed due to a fear of ridicule.
  4. Things that are repressed and buried in the subconscious: deep fears and anxieties, things from childhood, open units of work
  5. Untapped potential: things in the superconscious (positive aspects of the what people are unconscious of).

Organizations will survive if most stuff is under the table. Things under the table are never seen but the system can only respond to what it sees. To thrive, this stuff needs to come onto the table.

Marshak thought there were multiple prerequisites for stuff to come onto the table. It turns out that everything boils down to one thing: [[humans.systems.psychological-safety]].

When intervening, be intentional about what you put onto the table. Does it help the organization to perform better, or why are you doing so?

## Questions For Reflection

- What is on the table in your organization / team?
- What is under the table and why?
- What is above the table and why?

* * *

See [this video](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=76tllNnzuOc) for an introduction to this topic.

