
# Listening

> We say what we say, but they listen what they listen. And in between is the black hole that swallows relationships, money, time and love.

Hearing is different from listening - listening is where meaning is made. 10 people can hear the same thing but listen in 10 different ways because each person is a unique [[humans.observer]].

We all want to be listened to and to be understood. Deep listening is a skill that is universally useful.

Deep listening requires awareness of your internal state (body, emotions and internal thoughts) as well as being aware of the BEL of the speaker.

* Self-management: build awareness so you are aware of whether you're caught up in your own thoughts, distracted, coming up with a response, or your own story about what the speaker is saying
* Being present: reschedule the conversation or decline it if you are not able to be fully present (e.g, distracted with other work)
* Notice the BEL of the speaker: "its fine" while appearing stressed / uncomfortable
* Listen for [[humans.content-and-context]]
* Listen for care. Listening for an agenda misses what the speaker cares about, so the response does not address the speaker's concern
* Ask questions:
    1. Clarifying questions to get more facts
    2. Questions to find out what the speaker care about, getting to know the human being on the other side

## Filters, Discourses and Biases

Our discourse is our way of Communication. E.g, your beliefs, the way you move, how you speak.

A bias is a prejudice in favour or against something. This is not necessarily negative. E.g, a bias to eat healthily, being vegetarian.

A filter is a particular way of seeing the world. E.g, how you see money - spend it now to do things while you still can vs saving it for bigger purchases later.

Bias or filters will affect how you listen and could cause blind spots. Listening well requires self-work to become aware of these things.

Besides being aware of your own biases / discourses / filters, also listen out for those of the speaker.
