
# The 4 Somatic Archetypes

Each of us have a preferred somatic archetype, but it is possible to express the other 3 with practice to build range. There are situations where each disposition would be useful.

The practice suggested for each archetype is an exaggerated version of each; you could be in a wheelchair and display all 4 archetypes.

## Resolution

Also known as the warrior.

In this stance, gaze is tightly focused on a specific point, breathing is short through the nose to the throat, and firm muscular tone throughout the body. Energetically you feel as though you’re a race car driver with engines roaring. The momentum of your energy is forward.

You are Concerned about taking action, rousing energy and motivation and moving forward decisively. The warrior is a strategist and tactician, adapting quickly to new situations. Objectively assesses capabilities and limitations of a situation or people (including himself). Focused around a central commitment.

Predisposition for action: act decisively, be dutiful, loyal and to succeed

Emotional landscapes accessed: ambition, boldness and bravery, alertness, discipline, tenacity, subjective detached, self-denial for the cause, courage, endurance, dutifulness and loyalty.

Examples: top executives and managers, professional athletes

This is where conversations for coordinating action come from - organizing people and resources, moving forward with coordinated Action and committed execution. These conversations bring about the tangible achievement of declared goals and desired Results.

Practice: stand with your stronger leg forward and lean forward. With hands outstretched, move them back towards you, as if you're grabbing something that you really need - fingers clenched an invisible object. Keep leaning forward when doing so.

## Openness

Also known as the lover. Opposite of resolution.

In this stance, one’s gaze is diffused and soft, breathing is through the mouth down to the stomach, and muscular tone is light & supple throughout the body. Energetically your desire is to feel everything and to merge and be one with the universe. The momentum of your energy is moving backward.

You are concerned about creating, connectedness through feeling and merging in oneness. It is this stance that keeps the other three humane and energized. It is critically important for the well being of self and others.

Predisposition for action: satiate primal hungers, socialize, connect, rest and renew, heal, relate, listen, create, play, seek pleasure, be subjective, daydream, be nostalgic, do nothing in particular, seek meaning… and more.

Emotional landscapes accessed: empathy, intuition, desire, gentleness, enthusiasm, vitality, passion, compassion, longing, sensitivity, sensuality, playfulness, spontaneity, indulgence, addiction, joy, and being romantic about our lives and our goals.

Examples: artists, fictional writers, composers, innovators, and creators... anyone creating through feeling vs. thinking.

This is where the conversations for relationships come from. Deliberately learning about and connecting with others is the foundation for [[humans.trust]], care and more acceptance when conflicts arise. For example, asking about someone's weekend sincerely in this stance indicates care about people as human beings beyond their position in an organization.

Practice: lean back, relax and smile. Spread your arms out wide as if you are allowing someone into your space.

## Stability

Also known as king / queen.

In this stance, one’s gaze is towards the infinite, breathing deeply & slowly through the nose to the pelvis, exhaling slowly through the nose, and with a moderate firm muscular tone throughout the body. The momentum of your energy is downwards, firmly rooting you in place.

You are concerned about order, fertility and blessings. You provide reason and rational operations, integrity, nurturing, generosity, integration and generative energy. Provides reassurance in chaotic situations.

Predisposition for action: provide order, peace and reliability; postpone gratification; facilitate systematic growth; provide nurturing and approval

Emotional landscapes accessed: calmness, subjective detached, dignified, patience, caring and steadiness

Examples: CEOs, parents, athletics coaches

This is where conversations for context setting and orientation comes from.

Practice: stand slightly wider than shoulder width. Anchor both feet to the ground and focus on distributing weight evenly across 3 points of your feet: the ball, heel and beneath your toes. Soften but do not bend the knees.

## Flexibility

Also known as magician or jester. Opposite of resolution.

In this stance, one’s gaze is wide, taking in the entire panorama; breathing is a short and quick inhale through the nose with a long extended exhale through the mouth and a medium muscular tone throughout the body. Energetically you feel ready to solve the mysteries of the universe. The momentum of your energy is going up to your brain, to the sky.

you are concerned about awareness, illumination, technical skill, and knowledge for the benefit of others. You guide processes of transformation, thinking through issues that are not immediately apparent to others.

Predisposition for action: observe and monitor the data coming from within and without, and through wisdom, push the right buttons at the right time to channel outcomes.

Emotional landscapes accessed: insight, wisdom, subjective detachment, clear sightedness, thoughtfulness, reflection, and objective perspective.

Examples: inventors, scientists, doctors, technicians, lawyers

This is where conversations of Innovation and Speculation comes from. Involves productively exploring possibilities, alternatives and implications, playing “what if?” and drawing out the unique contributions of all involved.

Practice: reach towards the sky, wiggle your body about and do whatever feels right at this moment.

---

Much of this explanation is from Language and the Pursuit of Leadership Excellence.
