
# Roles Of The Gestalt Intervener

In clean interventions, we are not agents of change. We are agents of awareness so that there is always choice.

The 4 roles the gestalt practitioner can adopt to intervene in a way which preserves choice, in order of invasiveness:

1. _"I notice"_: "I notice only half of the people in the room have spoken". Simply a presentation of the data from observing emerging patterns and themes, providing new sensations for people to complete their own [[humans.cycle-of-experience]]. Avoid mixing it with other interventions.
2. _"I feel"_: this is your emotion, mobilizing in you, it is not anyone elses. This maps to mobilization in the cycle of experience.

   Avoid naming the emotions of others. Since you own your emotions, no one else can challenge them, vs other people challenging your assessments of their emotions.

   Requires use of self.
3. _"Could you"_: making a request to move the individual to action and contact in the cycle of experience.

   This is a request, so the individual still has choice. There is a thin line here so be careful.
4. _Grand theorizing_: uses abstract theories, concepts, generalizations and metaphors to make meaning of what was observed. Can clarify when the system is in confusion. Maps to satisfaction and withdrawal. E.g, "Some discomfort is needed for learning", "getting buy-in from everyone seems to be an impossible task"

Each intervention should take 5 - 10 s max. Be clear and Concise. Get in. Get out.

Different people have different needs, e.g some people need grand theories. Pay attention to the complaints of the system to decide which to use.

## References

- [Four Roles of the Gestalt Intervener: Holistic Presence Using Experiential Learning Theory](https://maraineyassociates.com/wp-content/uploads/2020/08/Holistic-Presence-Using-Experiential-Learning-Theory.pdf)
