
# Psychological Safety Workshop

These notes are from the Psychological Safety workshop (now [Power Dynamics and Psychological Safety](https://thethoughtcollective.arlo.co/w/courses/14-power-dynamics-and-psychological-safety)) by The Thought Collective taken on 12 Nov 2020.

Unlike [[humans.fpc2]], this is only a 1 day workshop which assumes no familiarity with FPC material.

Because psychological safety is related to system work, most of the content introduced overlapped with FPC 2. I found that being familiar with this material from FPC 2 improved my learning a lot, as I could spend my attention on understanding how the pieces fit together.

Since time was limited, we learned about how to spot lack of safety. Intervention strategies to create safety will hopefully be covered in another day.

1. [[humans.systems.marshaks-table]]: psychological safety is needed for things that are under the table and are not discussed to come onto the table.
2. [[humans.trust]]: how trust is built. Trust is related to but is not the same as psychological safety.
3. [[humans.systems.organism-and-environment]]: we instinctively feel safer the more we know about our environment. What we see also influences how safe we feel.
4. [[humans.systems.linguistic-behaviours-from-lack-of-psychological-safety]]: behaviours that show up when feeling unsafe, and how each is an attempt at preserving trust.
5. [[humans.systems.psychological-safety]]: what is psychological safety? Safety is also only useful to reveal sufferring and for diagnostic work, not intervention.
6. [[humans.systems.5-conversations-for-human-work]]: when there is no safety in the wider system, create safety by setting up [[humans.systems.containers]] for these conversations to take place.
7. intervention work: FPC 2 stuff - power, resistance, culture, container building etc
